Interviewer  0:00  
Gross. Well, hello, hello. Hello. Hi, Martin, how you doing? I'm good. And yeah, I'm good. So thank you for joining us while I'm spending the whole day with Hans Levin spells on various calls. I spoke to him earlier. And now we're going to talk to three of the designers that have worked with him, starting with you. So Martin, tell us first of all, where you are.

Maarten Baas  0:24  
I'm at my home and interact in the Netherlands.

Interviewer  0:28  
And what does that behind you? That's a piece of art, is it?

Maarten Baas  0:31  
Yeah, it's a it's a painting by by turn Hawks. I think all Dutch people know him. But I don't know how internationally known he is. But one of my favourite artists actually. Tell us a little bit about yourself, Martin, who are you? And what do you do? Yeah, what I'm doing that that always depends a little bit on who's listening. Like for design, I could call myself probably still a designer, but if you know my work a little bit, and you know, it's somewhere somewhere between art and design, and everybody always debates about what's the difference and whatsoever. But anyway, so something like that. Some people would probably know the clock that I made for, for. Also in the Schiphol Airport, Amsterdam Airport, there's this big clock in which seems as if there's a man inside, it's one of my works. The clay furniture, I just had this miniature here. So like the play miniature chair, Well, some people know about that one smoke that was actually my graduation, project burnt furniture in which I literally charcoals pieces of furniture, which I treated with epoxy resin so that they were usable again. So that briefly some of my works, you might know.

Interviewer  1:57  
And I certainly know smoke because I bought one of my pieces of furniture, I shipped it to you remember, we had a wooden bench that have been in our family for a long time. My father gave it to me. And I was very disappointed how I this beautiful piece of antique furniture that I remembered from my childhood was actually really ugly. He didn't say can you improve it for me? Do you remember that?

Maarten Baas  2:20  
Yeah, definitely. You are an early adapter. You. You also were there when I burned this grand piano for Li ADAL court. And this week, I heard that this is going to the museum collection of the van Abba Museum in Eindhoven. So, so it's still still going there.

Interviewer  2:38  
And you've also contributed a couple of movies to our virtual design festival.

Maarten Baas  2:42  
Yeah, definitely. Yeah. When when, when a Corona kicked in, and everybody was, was away. And so I thought like, well, let's let's go on. Yeah, let's make a few short movies. I anyway, do that every now and then. It's not kind of my core business or so to make make small movies, but sometimes with when there's an occasion I like to make a small movie. And I also did that for the for the design festival. And they

Interviewer  3:08  
and how has this pandemic time been for you? What have you been doing?

Maarten Baas  3:13  
Well, for me, it was really nice. I mean, I, it didn't hit me that that hard. So that's easier to say that it's nice because I see also around me a lot of people in a cultural industry. They are very hit very hard. And especially in Holland, I have been very critical on that there was no support for the cultural and art scene. And they were, it was very difficult to cope with it. But if I look at me personally, I really I I totally had a good time. Really. I like doing nothing and Well, that was also part of the game. There was nobody asking anything from me. And yeah, well, I really enjoyed it. The the silence the being at home. I totally had a good time. 

Interviewer  4:05  
And Hans, tell us about how you first started to work with Martin, 

Hans Lensvelt  4:11  
you know, was founded in 2000. And

I ended up more after three months. And then one year later, or two years laters that shouldn't leave us Marty with this. old furniture, furniture, smoke furniture. It was introduced by Marcel as the new piece what we should sell in, in Milan and actually that was at one of those pre Milano parties what we always organised at my house here in Breda. Desperate, that's where I met laughter for the first time actually. Yeah.

Interviewer  4:56  
And I think you've prepared a little presentation about you Yes, I do that now.

Hans Lensvelt  5:02  
Okay, okay. But this, let me see, then I have to go here this and then I have to go here. So I would like to start here. This is our presentation in 2007, in Milan during the Salone, del Mobile. And it was called, may I have your attention place. And Marta, together, we got an I changed the screen I see. And together we go this wonderful award, the Milano Design Award for this installation as being the best, the best the best concept and this picture is made just before with all started, and we are using here the shares, which you designed for this event, what was actually a part of a bigger thing called May I have your attention may or may I have your attention was the cry for the 2800 exhibited in Milan asking for attention. And that was the concept. And then I'll move to the next. And this is where we just talked about this is probably the most beautiful picture every mate of smoke piece. This is where I was aware of Mark boss is really a great designer, who I saw developing through the years from designer into a full artist. This was a very specific night. And avant is why he is one of my very, very, very best friends, she really helps me with how to move forward with my business. And on the right hand side you see in a kessels he is enormous in a communication. And exactly this night, immediately for or after this picture was made. They said Hans, you have to go to Milan in 2017, with Martin boss. And you know, I had certain kinds of other ideas, I was not sure. And then instant I checked, the website of marketing. And all the match on matters website was great. Martin boss is not interested in mass production. And so I said, Alma, please do your best, but I don't believe in it. Now on a day to day job. And

Maarten Baas  7:41  
the first still the case, by the way, I'm still not interested in mass production, it's it's kind of a necessary evil to make some mass production in order to express myself. So it still stands.

Hans Lensvelt  7:54  
But I'm very happy that Allah convinced yourself to do this installation altogether, you know. And so we decided to make it much better than a few chairs, it became an entire installation. And the main part of the installations were those homes, which all were whispering and begging for energy and begging for attention. And he you do see the the horse production. This is then the next slide, how they were shown during the installation to solo exhibition of your work marked in the chromium Museum in February 2017. And this is a picture made as the after party. And you know, I really feel very, very proud that I'm there in between the star designers of this air and Andreas bloom, the director of the groninger Museum.

Maarten Baas  9:01  
It's actually still on display as we speak. It's in display in Lausanne in Switzerland, the installation in modaks. museum. So if if people are from Muslim listening, they could still have a look. There

Hans Lensvelt  9:16  
might be also a nice opportunity to visit since the borders are open again. Yeah, sure. Now then this is how it looked in Milan. This is in Arizona centrala. This is beneath the highways. The railway, and this was our cocktail party, the fifth of April. And then completely unexpected. Again we were invited. And this is the last picture. What could we made with an iPhone because our batteries were dumb. But here the award is handed over. And then of course, we have this product Product Marketing. That was a check. With all the people who approached me. They said, Hans, we also need a wooden chair. We also need a stackable chair. We need a chair with armrests. We need the stool. And what is difficult to do for artists be difficult, but easy. Now difficult for an artist, but easy for the designer is to do that all. So you did it. And later you created this, this picture, maybe you can tell something about this picture Mark?

Maarten Baas  10:39  
Yeah, it was kind of funny. Like, it's actually this year, I'm exactly 18 years graduated. So I'm 18 years professional, so to say. So now I finally am a mature designer, so to say, but, but nevertheless, like I like to play with, with the conventions of design. And as I said, like I'm actually more artists who expresses himself in in design. And that's why I'm also not so interested in mass production because of, for me, it's already done when I when I make one piece, it's actually enough and the rest I'm not so interested in if there's one or 1000 doesn't make a difference for me. Nevertheless, like I've been always, first I did the burned furniture after that I made the clay furniture which, which looks like as a child has been playing around a little bit with with clay. And in the background of this picture, you also see a kind of a assemble assembled piece with all kinds of found objects, I made a chair and it all always had this kind of childish approach. And to make a stackable chair to me felt really like oh, that's really a sign of maturity, you know, like like to make something stackable, really industrial and, and like that. So so I kind of imagined like as if I was a kind of a child playing in his, in his attic or cell, or in his shed to experiment with fire and experiment with clay and experiment with all kinds of materials. And all of a sudden, I made a stackable chair. So I made I imagine a mom being very proud of us, of her son. So I asked my mom to pose for this for this picture. And with the quote like oh my God, my son, you made a stackable chair. So it's my actual mom, she doesn't normally dress like this, but but for the picture we did beautiful picture by floor clap. And so yeah, that's that's the background of it, I thought like, let's let's make a picture like that. It's, it would fit the concept.

Hans Lensvelt  12:45  
Okay. And then here we are showing in another way the entire family This was during an exhibition in the Netherlands object hotel down

Maarten Baas  13:00  
here, you know, like, that's, that's what I like, because you're talking about mass production or not, like, when you approached me to do something, I felt like landscape that's, that's a office furniture maker. Well, office furniture sounds very boring, of course, a year before that you made also the boring collection, which I also really liked, by the way. But as I like, okay, normally I don't make mass production because of normally, then you just have to make a kind of crappy design for a crappy producer. And I'm totally not interested in it. But first of all, lancefield always approaches Milan and their presentation in a very artistic way. So that's, that's what I'm sensitive for. But also I saw like the the fact that it was mass produced, I saw as an opportunity to make something unique like that. So that's why all the little backs, they are a little bit different. You know, like, it's as if, as if already somebody is sitting on the chair, without somebody sitting on the chair, you know, there, they already are a kind of a personality in itself. So on this picture, you also can see it as a total if you have 10 of them. In other words, if there's a mass of it, then then it becomes an installation in itself. So that was my purpose. So it's not about one chair, but it's about the set of it, which is always a unique set of furniture. So, so that's also explains why I actually did want to do it in this in this way. But anyway, continue Hans. Yes. And,

Hans Lensvelt  14:28  
and then we showed it also made me laugh in 2019 you know, and I love this post because it's it's, it's, it's, it's really marked the you know, taking the vacuum cleaner and supporting the team with getting it all cleaned in time, you know. And then, you know, as I explained before, you know the people who use our furniture that are cosmopolitans who are aware who are conscious love the environment who love architecture who love music, design. And yeah, in this way I love this picture where the furniture his move is used in a Moscow project by P 12. Architects. Here it is used in Amsterdam in the eight forms. And you see it stackable, it's in it's in transparent paint oak wood here in combination with a table of hoppy a valise out the shaker table. And then now most probably the most important picture who's coming out this is actually how I always hold back the wants to see laughing and happy and this was a few weeks ago at the opening ever in the gallery, where we presented furniture designed by our mutual friend

Interviewer  16:18  
Marty

Maarten Baas  16:20  
Yeah. Actually about the stackable chair. The difference between the stackable chair and and the non stackable chair is the the legs like they stick out, you know, that's why you can you can stick and stack them. But normally it's a kind of a concession to the design if you make it make it stackable, it mostly looks less nice. But I must say I'm actually sitting on one of them in my house and I deliberately chose for the stackable one because I like them even more for a reason. Like they become a kind of a I don't know if I can show that like they can become a kind of a grasshopper you know you see the the lack of sticking out. So it becomes kind of a grasshopper creature which I kind of like so. So even if they weren't stackable, then probably I still would choose for for that design. So my first stackable chair is even has a double reason to exist in that sense.

Hans Lensvelt  17:21  
Okay, battens mark, is this where my slides.

Interviewer  17:25  
Okay, gonna unshare your presentation then. So Martin, you said that you're not interested in, in mass production, why is that?

Maarten Baas  17:40  
Mother is not really a reason it's not really like, anti or so it's just like, I don't tend to do that, like, in in the Instagram description. It's out now. Like, I'm an artist born in the body of designer, which is actually kind of how I indeed feel it like in the first instance, I want to express myself. And I think design for me is a very good way to do that because it has certain restrictions. It has a certain boundaries within you can move, but then still, I like to use it as a form of expression rather than to make the best industrial chair or so. So like also what many designers say that in the end, you would like to start to have your product in every living room, I've never had that as a goal. It's I don't mind if it's in somebody else's living room dealer, to be honest, I just want to make a chair or any other product. And then it gets somewhere but but it starts within my interest to make something so that's why I don't mind if it ends up in a mass production or in a limited edition. Of course you need to sell in order to make new work. So there should be kind of a business model behind it. But that's for me the second the second step and not where it comes from. So So yeah, I think that's that's how it is and also on a certain moment I I did quite regularly I made shows in in Milan and and they were always a bit different than the rest let's put it like that. And that attracted also a lot of industry or industrial companies Oh, really made their money in in kind of crappy ways with with with stupid products. And then they would ask me to make also something for them and then they would use that more as a kind of a promotion tool rather than to make a genuine product. And that's exactly what what Hans doesn't do, like, like, there's a good story. And, and, yeah, I could also make this whole installation in Milan, with all those speakers, it was about attention, you know, like, not only attention to Milan, but just attention in, in general, like, I think getting attention and, and sharing attention is kind of the, it became kind of as more valuable as money, you know, like, like you want to be, you want to share your idea you want to be heard and you want to be liked and you want to and the other way around you, you listen to others, you like others. So there's a kind of a whole economy of attention going on. And that was the statement I wanted to make in, in, in Milan. So I really liked it that that was the whole holistic approach of lamps felt in order to make this chair. So that's why I, that's why I like to approach it like, like that.

Interviewer  21:01  
And what Martin has just said is it is a criticism that's often made the whole design industry, that you have these brands, and they work with all the same designers and designers work with all the same brands, and the products are not really products, their marketing tools. Sometimes they go into production, often they don't go into production. How do you avoid that as the head of your own brand? What is different about the way you do things? Yeah.

Hans Lensvelt  21:32  
That's a fruitful question. You know, actually, I do my own thing. And I'm, I'm not comparing my company with the other companies actually, you know, so I'm just doing my thing, I believe in my own values, I believe that our product should be timeless, that authentic that they they, they should be innovative. And I work with, with most of the designers I still working with I already started working when they were very young men when they were in the start of their career. So yeah, yeah. Yeah.

Maarten Baas  22:16  
So the fact the fact that you that you don't have a clear answer to that means that you really are totally embedded with this idea that Yeah, speaking that it's that it should be like that, but I think pretty unique that that a producer approaches approaches the production in such a way always your your presentations in in Milan has always been really great exhibitions, they could have been copy paste to a museum show, which actually also happens, like what we just said. And yeah, but for you, it's probably not even a business model or, or, or an idea. It's just you with by yourself, and that's why it's so good. Yeah.

Hans Lensvelt  23:00  
Yeah, that's excellent. Actually, the the presentation is in Milan, they first started, as I said, the kind of team building, you know, people go to the events to create a solid team. But we thought, Okay, let's go to do Milan, and we were always happy with the attention and we had a lot of fun. With through the years, of course, it changed the game, we were spending much more money, and it became much more a series of thing. And yeah, and it became, of course, as company wants to survive. And as a company, of course, we need we need sales. And that's also the biggest compliment what I can get, you know, the most beautiful thing is when I do see my products really used, but it is not so that we develop a certain kind of image product, which we are going to show in Milan to cover actually a lot of bad products. What we have is not like that. It's always full of fashion. You know, it's my mission to create a beautiful product. Every product that we create should be beautiful, really.

Interviewer  24:23  
And Martin on this collection that you designed for hands, it is mass production, but how did you manage to turn it into a range of vendors? That doesn't look like much production that looks like they were all handmade or maybe they are all handmade? Where does mass production start and and craft stop?

Maarten Baas  24:43  
Well, I must say I also must think Rick for that the developer of arms because of he had to make my kind of crappy sketches into into a usable product. But yeah, we found a way like We, I made sketches by by hand of how the how the back should look and that has been put into the computer that that makes the CNC the computer controlled. Hand sort of article, I don't know the English word for that, but anyway, like, it cuts out the back. So, so the, the computer programme is, is I told by by hand, I made a sketch and that's been made in a computer programme, which kind of can cut out the backs of the chair. And another thing is also like, it's only the back of the chair, which changes every time, the rest of the chair is standard, because of if you would redesign the whole chair every time, then they will have much more problems in production. And if you only focus on the back, then you can still make this variety. But you still have a lot of freedom in in the production as well.

Interviewer  26:04  
And both of you you both of you enjoy putting on very entertaining shows instead of just putting your product on on a pedestal you there's a whole experience, particularly with your shows Martin, remember hands once you had a giant gun on the gun. And you're given what happened in the last few months, what is the future of those kinds of fairs? Can we ever go back to having that kind of presentation? Or will it be different in the future these who are you're asking most of you know, you know,

Hans Lensvelt  26:40  
already before COVID, Milan was changing, Milan is change it is enormous, enormous, it is expensive. And what we forget is that the architects, the interior designers will be focusing up when they come to Milan, they just do a few spots in the city. And they are there for a very short period. So the chance that you see them the chance that you can show your installation that you can show your product is very limited. And for the last years, fortunately, we saw less and less of the so much appreciated architects and interior designers we are working with that's one thing on the other thing is that Milan is not a fair for people who want to buy furniture anymore, it is a fair of people who want an experience, they want to see funny nice things like like, like in such a park you know. And

so,

I think this COVID this Corona is now an accelerator to make to create a new salona and like you are doing right now. And it will be it will be much more virtual. Not everybody can't go anymore. Not everybody wants to go anymore. Many many other people go there, but they go for the experience not for the furniture.

Interviewer  28:31  
So will you still go to Milan were you not sure you Will you do something else smaller, more local

Hans Lensvelt  28:38  
rethinking with everything can change tomorrow, we will go back to Milan, but we will do very small installation, some psych returning a restaurant is more restaurant into an insular station or something like that, you know what we will not go back to lumber or we will not go back to a large museum. We will not go back to went to visit rally to do that a large expensive installation that does not bring the money. The investment is far too high.

Interviewer  29:17  
And what about you Martin?

Maarten Baas  29:19  
Yeah, I agree with with what the answer says both that it had it was changing already before before COVID. And, and for what the future will be. Wow, probably I will see a little bit like I always react in the moment. You know, like I had the the content of my work as always to do with where we are at that very moment. And it's at this moment quite hard to tell how we will be in April 2021. So I will have to see how Milan evolves to see what what would be my part in that but i I wonder if I if I would, I don't think indeed, like the shows, as they were, will, will continue to be like that. But at the same time, I think people want to have this experience somehow, but maybe indeed more local, like, like, actually one of the things that I did, since since this Corona time, I invited people in my studio very targeted, like 30 people, because that was in Holland, the rule, you could have only 30 people if you had at a restaurant or a party or something like that. So I invited exactly 30 people who I would like to see my work and, and, and I told about my work with a dinner and everything. And that was kind of a very small event, but probably just as nice for everybody and an effective and whatever you want to call it. Because of because of exactly the 30 people who, who I would like to share it with. And that's, that's, that's a nice alternative. So maybe they are the kind of alternatives that works and everybody has their own way in in, in finding solutions in that. But if the whole world will go back to Milan and see their, the the bigger and bigger and bigger brands making bigger and bigger shows, I wonder if that's if that's going to be like that. If it's like that, then I think it really will build up slowly but I think next year or so it will not be like that yet.

Interviewer  31:34  
Okay. Well, great. Great to see you again, Martin. Okay, you again the hands and I'll see you again in 30 minutes from now with your client. Looking forward. I think your market might come to one of your dinners by the way. Okay, yeah. If I can get there from London. Okay, I'll move it right

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
