dataset;session;speaker;utterance
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Hey, hello, Fabio, can you hear me? So why are you here? How you doing? Very good. Good to see you. You too. Are you completely change your look, since I last saw you what.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;we're testing for Narcos, you know. So, I was trying to get into the character, a drug lord. And I was thinking about, you know, I could be I could possibly the perfect casting.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;I recognize where you are you in your house in Milan, right? Yeah. Yeah. Sammy today. And you have a guitar. So why don't you play something for us, but as long as it doesn't have a copyright, you'd want to get into trouble?
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;I will, I will play it when when we speak on it, I think it's good as a background music, you know, I will want to work on soundtracks.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So tell us how the last few months been for you in Milan.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;Um, you know, Milan, in the last month has been quite strange. But like, all over the world, in some ways, you know, I mean, it's like, we have been locked down in our houses for more than three months, and he never happened on the surface of this planet, more than half of the population has been in these conditions, it's, it's been a very interesting time. I mean, apart from all the disaster and people that died, and we're very sorry for that, but, but it gave us a chance for a possible green a sense in some ways with to completely reset. And we think about the way we we love people, to people surround us, I mean, what's really important what, what really matters, and coming to design, also to in some ways to mirror ourselves, in the places where we leave, for example, I realized the 3d these hours, perfectly represents me, I live very well inside this place. But because I really built it as, as a mirror, it's something that really would represent myself. But this is not very common, I would say, because lots of people that I was talking to, they were saying, Oh my god, I feel imprisoned in displays, you know, I can't breathe, you know, and that's something very interesting goes. houses have always been very much representing, you know, the, the landlord, the people that leaves in it, but now more and more we use them like hotel rooms, or, you know, what I mean is like, for me, it's a very good way, it's very good chance to rethink about our relationship with our own private places. Also, you know, let's talk about this networking thing, you know, I mean, we have to probably transform our home, into our office as well. So it has to be also interpreted on different points of view. I mean, it really gave us a lot to think about a lot to work about, you know, in the future in the near future. Basically, you know, I was this morning with some friends that we were saying, the problem with battalions, is that we consider public space is no man's land, you know, this, this got interesting. Now, I mean, we, we have a lot of affection for our own private places, but we cannot relate to public space, because public spaces of everybody, and we don't have an idea of community. So that, I would say that if we really want a real Renae sense, we should start from house, we should start from our home. But then adapt the concept. The surrounding is like a stone in, in the water, you know, like circles that get bigger and bigger and more and more inclusive. You know, I really would say that if we want to change things, we should go in the streets. I mean, when I when I've been living two years in New York, you know, I was looking at the, the homeless in the streets sitting on sofas, and I was thinking, oh my god, these people, they really own the city. They're sitting comfortably on a sofa, watching the environment. I mean, they really own the city, you know, we feel like the public space doesn't belong to us. He does, we should go back into the streets. Trying to have a sense of adopting places you know, so even if there is some garbage on the on the ground, actually grab it and throw it in the garbage can, you know, I mean, he's like that. It's like adopting the same behavior as I do in my whole house. You know, that's, that's a very important concept, especially for people like as I mean, we work with the with space, we whether we public space with private space, we should think about the basis of what we do. I mean, that that's really something that affects me a lot.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So we're here to talk about the work Keep them with Lorenzo. How'd you How'd you know hands? When did you first meet? Do you remember the time we went together to see hands, by the way in Ventura brought to you took me on your scooter. And they had the big blue gun.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;I'm thinking at how many years ago because he invited me to one of to a conference that he was hosting. And how many years ago? Was it? Something like more than 20. Right? And how many? It was 2000 2000 years ago, 20 years ago? Exactly. it you know, I mean, I received this invitation from, from Atlanta, it's already at the time was, you know, a very important business man in the field. And I was, I was excited. And I was proud of this invitation. And I went there. And the, you know, beside the businessman, I met the band. And the we're best friends, Mark was really our best friend. I mean, I love him hands. He's one of the most generous person I've ever met. And I mean, I'm friends with this family. I mean, I love this man. So that working with them has been just the evolution of a relationship. I mean, it's like, it's not been like, gives me a brief and the developer brief. Actually, nothing in my life is that way, everything gets very personal. I always like to be involved very personally. I mean, I, I'm not called. It's really, really, it's really hard to to keep these tests with things and with people. And so everything has been a beautiful evolution, you know, his personal history. I remember I introduced him to Marcel, and it together with Marcel he made the Moy that we know. Because more in the very beginning was a completely different thing. And, and lots of things. I mean, we have seen his kids from this height to, to taller than me, you know, I mean, like, family. It's family. And it's any Italian. I know what I'm talking about.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So Hans, what's your version of the story? Maybe? No, maybe now's the time to show the the slideshow?
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Yes, yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. This I will put a weight into this. So this actually, but now you cannot see it, I guess. Oh,can you see this? Not yet? Not yet. Oh, my God, because then I did this apple pie. Okay, maybe maybe like this. Yeah, starting to work now. Okay, Devin, I.have to do like this. Okay. So this is the gallery here in Amsterdam. And this gallery is now dedicated to a few artists. One of the artists is muscle one. Not Excuse me, is you Felicia, on the left hand side, this is a deck, an enormous deck I want to put in front of my decks, because I was interrupted 10 times in a day with silly questions. And then I thought, okay, let's put this thing on the other side of my desk, so that when people want to speak with me, they have to climb over this desk, and then they see themselves in the mirror behind me next to next Tuesday. I know. So at the top of this deck, that's one piece. The other piece piece you see is a piece designed by Fabio. And as we are friends for more than 20 years. Finally, we succeeded into having a product together again, that makes makes me really very, very happy. Then, this is a picture made in November 2000. s Fabio just said family audit the lecture for me for something like 2000 people and the day after five your state and he said, You know I'm working for capellini Maxwell Wallace is also working for a couple you name it, I would like to meet him. And in those days, there was there was not all the technical things you have now. So I called an agency for the telephone number of the studio. I call the studio there was a lady and I said can I have lunch tomorrow with Marcel and with Fabio and she go back and she set it out that's fine. And we add the spoons in the Japanese restaurant or cuca in Amsterdam and this is one of the pictures for Fortunately, I made because this was an enormous step in my career. I know muscle windows through Fabiano fama. And since that moment, Fabio, we all wait stay Trent friend. When I visited you, we sat together we had dinners. And when you came in Amsterdam, we drove around. We organized dinners. This is one of the dinners here in Amsterdam. And about the friendship of Fabio. In 2080, I married I decided that it was time to marry with swan. And for me, it was clear that only one person. So as he said only Italians know something about family that I decided to ask Fabio is my best man. And this is when I saw all the channels in Amsterdam, Fabio that morning. And you know, you can see how extremely happy that we are. But Fabio also brought an incredible present. And you can see all those scarfs and you can see the shovel spec packed with people. So we arrived with the boat back from the city hall. And then in front of the benches. There were lots of peoples with this colored scarves. And normally that are the colors of IX, the football team from Amsterdam. So I thought that are the people that are the hooligans of AI x. But then later on I found out that people visiting visiting my, my marriage, so that was totally, totally great. Yes. Okay, that about Fabio and me now about the cooperation. So as I told when I was in Milan, I visit always, Fabio, I always sleep in his guest house. And in this period, a fortune. It was in December 2014. Fabio had to go outside the country for a lecture. And I had dinner and film with all his crew. And.they said, How can you do a presentation for us what actually mansfeld is doing for us. And that's what I did. And I showed all the workers, all the designers we worked with. But the final thing, the final slide where the fuck is fab uniform, okay, it was my intention to work for 20 years with Fabio and I was never able. And with those people, I expressed this, this this wish. And this is only in December, and fabric came back and he said house actually is a great idea. That's what I like as well. And so it's all started and only a few months later. It is in April, we presented this so far called New Balance. Of course, things are changing. Lives are changing private labor to set changing careers are changing. We have COVID we have black lives matter. Everything is changing. And this so far, is a symbol of it. This without people this so far here was the master himself on it. Those pictures are made in Milan, in the Venturi centrala and here a film photo as most of the photos are with this all together. We chose this so far. Also in Eindhoven during the Design Week. Your user who you see on the left hand side isn't respected Dutch journalist writing about architecture and design. I have a range of interviews with your own you hoon. So we always invite two designers, and one of the designers gets the nasty questions. And the other designer gets the nice questions. for him. It's a certain kind of platform. And so here we have Fabio and the other person we divided is liable when I re Like baiga laga, once he is making his very special and really have this moment in time, it's always in the right proportions. And that in combination with the right materials, the calculus, it was it This made a really upgrade, appreciate. So that's why we also invited Lanka for this for this for this interview. And this is how Fabio appears. It's always interesting. Fabio includes always a special gift, the guitar today, but here, this T shirt, Who the fuck is far, far bigger. And Fabio, maybe you later can explain something about t shirt, because it has to do with the Rolling Stones. We cannot play songs of the Rolling Stones. But maybe we can we can do this. Okay, then here, the product what we developed together found in all different colors. As I said this called New Balance, Fabio now things are changing. And we all are getting more in balance at this main ambition to develop a second generation of this and to call it not balance, but to call it in balance or just balance. I think people people like that as well. And then two more slides to go. I would like to go back to this slide where Fabio the three of us met for the first time myself on this house Lynn Shelton Fabiano family. And now the final the final slide is more or less this site. This is a few weeks ago, at the end of last week, and they will see you again in the same order. Marcel me. And for me, it's so fantastic that 20 years of our life has passed, and that we are still such good friends. That's for me. So what Phil? And that's it. Yeah. Thanks. Do you wanna unshare the screen? Oh, I have an epic I get like this. I'm getting very professional in these all.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;I think Fabio Unfortunately, the zoom has cut out your music. So we need to get you now in here a bit of your guitar playing because it was just islands.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;I'm very intimate as a music. It's like wow. To me, and my daughter is coming aboard. My complimentary study rando. Sorry, man. See, I'm sorry, guys, this is like you see the good thing of the of the direct guy, you know, I go we live. So these you know, life goes on. Anyway, I would like to, to add something to what Alex was saying. I mean, you know, we always try to, especially in our city room, okay, in our living room. And it's interesting, the team that some people call sleep city room, some people consider leaving room. I like living room, of course. Because it's the room where you live with your family. It's like you get cozy you get comfortable. And then what do you want in this kind of room? You want stability? You want a balance, but stability and in humans? They don't really integrate this concept. I mean, because our life is getting nothing stable. Like, I mean, I realized that my life, I had so many earthquakes, you know, centimeter earthquakes and any kind of things. I mean, I lost my parents. I mean, we all go through these kind of earthquakes. So our idea of stability, it's always different. You know, I mean, it's like, our time is completely is full of our uncertainties. And in the only way is to evolve is to find new.particles of balance. Actually, that's the correct word. particles of balance. You know, in all this chaos is like, you know, Mandelbrot and all the theories about kales he tried to give lows to girls. He tried to rule chaos. But this idea of our self as is like fine being New balances in the complete disorder of our lives, you know, they don't. So even if you lose the legs, even if you lose an arm chair, whatever, you just find a new balance a new way of, of resisting or evolving. You know, for me, like everything I design, it's, it's a theory called Manifesto. In some ways, it's never just a softening, because what can you work about? I mean, you can just work on its comfort. I mean, there's people, actually, you know that in some companies, there are people that only test the comfort of solvers, so that you can not do it as a designer. You know, for me, design has always been like, you write a message, you put it in the battle, you throw it out in the, in the sea of objects, and it's what happens also, with the software, you know, it's like, we would extinct, we can not throw more messages that make more sense to us. We, we can die if we don't find a new balance in order to survive. And that's what this song has tried to talk about, you know, they talk about our lives, our imperfect lives.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So, Fabio, we were talking before with Martin bass and enhance about Milan, and what will happen in the future there with the fair and everything. What do you what are your thoughts? Is Milan getting it's getting back together, as I think is going to be like they were before? Or will it be different in future? Do you think,
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;Marcos, let's put it this way, I've never been a hooligan in anything. You know, I'm a supporter, and I like to watch good sport, but never been enrolled again. It means that I've never married the CCOs. By you know, like, for granted, let's put it this way. So even if I live in Milan, or even find me Catalan, I think that things really bold all the time. So even if Milano will not be the same, even if Milan will change and what else, we just have to believe in evolution. You're not in putting the UK flag on your shirt. And the answer is not doing it with the with the Dutch flag and not doing it with the Italian flag, we should judge just use one single flag, the word flag, and the word you know, it's always different balances as well. So that until now, Milan has been the epicenter of all the design cultural stuff, if we will be able to keep it good. Otherwise, it just will change. Like, and we cannot replicate something that cannot be replicated. I mean, it's like now everything will change the perception of people we changed, we would be not afraid of being close to each other means like, we'll see, we'll see. But we can only look forward, you know, not not connected to to the past. And he's like to vote Marcos. So we'll see Milano if it if everything will get organized and refold in a good way, Milano will keep on being such a place, otherwise, we will change it, whatever, you know, really. Let's accept life the way it is. And you know, for us, actually, I always think about what can I do? I can only put quality markers. You know, I'm 53 years old. And you know, when you're 53 you start thinking, you know, they're friends like como friends, Tomas said week, B archangels. They are 10 five years younger than me, a big skyscrapers, areas in the world. They're changing theories, and you're just doing little things. But you know, you keep on going. Because you realize that if you put quality than I'm on little things, it doesn't matter. If you do a space or a CT, if the intensity that makes the difference. It's the it's the quality of your work that makes a difference. And your work is made every day. So that let's just put our best in everything we do. That will change things. So I will try to make beautiful things for next year. I'm gonna try to send a lot of messages in the battle in the ocean of, of the markets. Still there, that's what I can do. And it's what we all can do. You know, if we raise the quality individually, it will raise publicly you know responses DDT is a huge burden. And you cannot always have Ghandi in order to do it on his shoulder. You know, I always think that we have a backpack of responsibilities that we all should put on our own shoulders so that I accept to bring my backpack of responsibilities. But we all should, it will be a definitely a better word. You know? It's just tried to do it, you know, and doing provision. So what can be I don't know. But if we are going in a good direction, it can just be better.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And hence, why did it take you so long to do a project with February then you said you knew him for 20 years? What was the what was holding you back?
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;I asked him, but but not on a very direct way. You know, it had to do with it. We had so many dentists together and always that night, that it came up, you know, sometimes Fabia was too busy, or Fabio was dead, or probably or maybe did not understand the backing. It never happens. Or maybe we agreed, and we forgot, you know. So we're always it was, for me, the intention to do once a project with Fabio. And then when I was doing this presentation for his crew, when he was no there, it also need the opportunity to get his staff know that I wanted this product, and that they had to know to convince but that they had to organize it actually. Yeah.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So when you launched when you started on this collaboration with Fabio, or with any design, in fact, is it a Is it a there's no business case? It sounds like it sounds like it's an adventure that you go on with someone you consider your friend? And do you even project the volumes or the turnover? volume. Because,
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;you know, I developed products, of whom I thought I would sell millions and I did not sell 10. And on the other end, I have developed products of whom I thought that they never would be very successful. And they came very successful. For instance, the chair, the office chair, have actually a release out we developed it and I thought actually I just did it to help to help to help you, you know, but then other people came around it. And so it really became a very successful product. Yes. So it's all that that we area you never mean ever enter, you know, with of course I know it. It has to be stable. It has to be innovative. It has to be authentic. It has to have this twist, this all has to be there. And then we can start working on it. You know? Yeah.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And it's nice that you're using these conversations to talk to your designers about what you're going to do next. He said to Fabio did he might be another version of.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;I hoped he would say yes,but I, I did not have enough so yet excuse me, as I would do anything we do, okay.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;But if you just seen what you were talking about, I can predict a success. I mean, our work is not fortune teller, you know, it's not science, it's not, you cannot predict you just try to do your best, you know, I mean, it's like, just try to do something that makes sense to you that you think that will help people, you know, improving their life or at least make them think, yeah, you know, but but he teaches he goes enterpreneur this this kind of intrapreneur more and more, if no space in the field. Yeah, I mean dreamers like Giulio cappellini I like a lost race in some ways. I mean, it's like, today is all about numbers. Can you survive, actually, if your market? Yeah, on the way I totally get it. You know, I mean, I think UK, IKEA is doing a fantastic job and it's meant to be but at the same time, you need a pioneering approach. And the best men to testify this kind of approach is ant lancefield. The answer has always been a pioneer. I mean, he's always been invested in design arts. I mean, everything that was interesting to him. It's been focused by him and, and he is working on it intensely. I mean, like, it can be really a new kind of intrapreneur For our field, you know, I think that there's been like, struggle people, like get a job who's nearly as bad as an author. I mean, we're pioneers. But in the old days, today, we can have answers, but I really think get proaches everything can be revolutionary. I mean, he's involved in very high profile people with very different backgrounds. And of course, he's not enough because a lot of other companies tried to do it, but what it really creates, is this family feeling, I mean, they put on line Martin bass, you follies out mean for less, I mean, I am worth nothing but but I mean, honoring him, you know, we will never do a commercial thing for the sake of a commercial you know, we are honoring a brother and and it makes a difference I think that to rise to the to the people that arise to somebody wants eventually to change the software's and say hey, you know, I it's really a philosophy behind and answers all these really he loves beautiful things he loves beautiful food I mean we have to to search for quality and these be searching for quality of life. You know that that's what I really learn by hands that you know, there's there's never a limit your is gone beyond your that when he was young he was connecting Ferrari's y'all didn't know, he was collecting variety. It's always been a lover of beauty and speed as well, because he likes being so fast. actually don't really know why. The probably we've been working the last 20 years together, because he's always been so fast. He's been doing so many things. I'm a bit slower, and he's going to do so now. He completely established. He says Fabio, I want to make Lancer, the most important furniture label in the world and say, Okay, I believe it would work together. You know what I mean? It's like he's focusing on this thing. Now. He's not keeping 10 things open. It's focusing on one thing, so I'm sure it's going to be successful.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Well, I think that's a great point to end on Fabio as always like your wedding speech. Again.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Can I have one final word? Nice. Yeah. Fabulous. Thank you so much. I have a mission. And I had a mission, but my mission is even more stronger now. Thank you so much for that. You are a true, friend. You are a brother.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Okay, thank you, guys. It's been really fun speaking to all of you. Soon again. Yeah. Thanks for Lensvelt connecting with me with so many of my friends today.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Fabio Novembre;Yeah. You know that me and Marcus have been friends for almost 20 years. I know you may have been supporting the scene from the very beginning, has been doing something amazing, because you're really pushing the field immediately. So that being on this platform for me is such an honor. You know, I'm honoring two friends that made incredible things, really.
Dezeentranscripts;fabio_novembre_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And thank you. Thank you for your support as well. You know, it means a lot to me. Okay. Thanks, guys. Thanks so much for doing this with us. And yeah, let's do it again soon. Yeah, I love it. Maybe better in the real world. But if not, then we can do it like this. Okay. Cool. Thank you.I love you all.Transcribed by https://otter.ai.
