dataset;session;speaker;utterance
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Hey, Elsa. I'm Marcus. How are you? Good. Thank you. And you.  I'm good. I'm very hot. I'm in. I'm back in the design office, because it's too noisy to work at home at the moment. And it's absolutely baking. Yeah. I recognize where you are, though.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Yeah, my bedroom. So you shouldn't recognize it that much. I'm saying the base of your house that I've actually been to, I know, there are some columns that you will recognize. But what you will also hopefully recognize is my most precious possession in the material world, which is a large piece of barkcloth, which was made by the Bureau Berlin, who were former students. And it's just fantastic. You know, it's it's an old thing. That's a new thing. No, that older than textile. But you know, probably the most beautiful new thing I can think of, is that the thing hanging in the background? Yeah, it's fantastic. So what is it it's cloth made of bark? Yeah. So it's an old technique. It was actually landed his graduation project at the design Academy Eindhoven. So basically, you know, older than textile is hammered bark. And this was a project she did in Tonga. And then, with a sort of sleight of hand it is then had you say sort of machine stitched with a kind of cross stitch to basically hold it together forever, sort of thing. So it's this sort of modern and modern Jacquard, if you like, on a really ancient piece of bark. It's a fantastically beautiful thing.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So anyway, also welcome to today's live interview, as part of our collaboration with brown. earlier on, we were talking to Benjamin Peter and Peter from Brown about the theme, which is good time design, in times for chain times of change. But why are you here today, as part of this brand collaboration, what's the connection?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;I have very recently, so it is brand new, so too early to describe in detail, but been asked to work with brown and the brown team to develop a series of master classes based on the brand principles that eat around principles, you know, such as built to last simple, etc. But to really explore those for young design interested audience and see their relevance really, for today as a way of thinking rather than an aesthetic mean, rather, as Peter was saying, you know, it's not about looking at things stylistically, it's about looking at the principles that go behind the thing that lead to a certain response to the world.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And that's literally something that's just been established in the last few days. Is it that those those master plans?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Yeah, I mean, we're working on it. So that as of now, but I think it's a really interesting topic, because I think, me certainly one of the things that you probably know only too well is that I think, my view is that design is too often treated as a noun and not a verb. You know, it is a process of going from realities of ideas of needs. It's joining many, many dots, and then synthesizing those into new realities that make sense. And it's an extraordinary discipline, I think, because it's one of the few that can go from the philosophical to the tangible. And, you know, whether we are aware of it or not, actually, you know, at times like this design is a hugely important tool for having agency over the world that will happen as part of teams not on our own. I mean, we have to be careful of overstating our case. But I think as part of teams, I think we're really valuable. Because we can help, I think, be a bridge between ideas and reality, make values visible, if you like.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And this is the first time you've worked with a sort of a hardware company, a technology driven company, like Brian, I know you've done some lighting collaborations, but you're best known of course, for your interior work and, and the kind of the mood that you create and the craftsmanship and the whole well being approach. So where does your subset of design overlap the brown subset of design, would you say?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;I think that it depends on what your definition of technology is, doesn't it? I mean, if you talk about technology being a bridge to the future You know, whatever medium that might be, then I think the thought processes, you know, obviously, with different contexts are not dissimilar because I mean, in some ways, what I do as an interior designer, is, you could argue quite technical because you're looking at him, I mean, if you're, let's say, looking at a hotel, or even an airport lounge, you're looking at the, you know, the practical needs, the operational needs, the needs throughout the day, the needs throughout the year, you're mashing all of these things together. And very often, technology plays an important part in that to me certainly does in the context of an airport land. And how do you integrate those into physical space? So it's that mass of information that you have to make sense of and synthesize and then find the most simple, intuitive response, which I think is in a way, a very similar process. But obviously, the context that skill sets are different, but I think the approach is not entirely different. Are you hearing some pinging? I think that might be me. in me, actually, hold on.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Unknown Speaker;I'm using a different computer to normal, but.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;I think it's all my technology, which is your emails open? Sounds like an Apple Mail notification. Yes. Be a lot of those. Let's throw down it all. Ah, okay. Sorry about that, guys.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;It's not the end of the world. I just thought it was me. Because when my when I get texts from my son that forget ping on the screen, but as a different sound that time. Let's not worry about it too much.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Okay, I'm gonna do this. Let's do. Yeah, I kind of find my, I got it. Play sound off. Hooray. may have worked.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Let's hope. Okay. Anyway, back to the conversation. Oh, you've got a little presentation of your work, why don't you fire that up now. And we can go through that and then designing the times of change afterwards, you have to invite me or you may have done already, but it should still be set up from before. Okay, let's screen, share your screen share screen. Works.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Um, presentation? Well, I think it's more of a discussion really. I just got three projects that I could show and share quickly. I think what's interesting about interior designers, it's so often seen, as, you know, choosing chairs or, you know, an aesthetic, essentially, you know, as I said earlier, nice to have but no need to have it sort of confused with soft furnishings in some people's minds. So I think what's quite interesting about our approach by focusing on the human experience focusing on real needs, and my big caveat there is its needs not once that I think is how you can make interiors that really neander sort of in an embodiment of the life that will be lived in a place and that consequently, one would have I loved but certainly are livable and and have a greater chance of lasting. This was a former soup kitchen now community kitchen. Again, so often people think that interior design is really just further sort of fancy side of life. And we certainly do have some clients who have some fairly fancy places, but we also are very committed to using our skill sets across sectors. And, you know, also for clients who maybe wouldn't normally have access to that skill set. So this is repertorio Felix, in US Court, part of the food resolve project, chaired by Massimo buturo and his wife and it's an extraordinary project which basically integrated design with an attitude to food but fundamentally an attitude to people the idea that the brief was to bring dignity around the table primarily to bring beauty into a social sector that is not generally speaking. You know, disgust in that way. You know, that actually, it's really about creating a frame for people to come together. Now the budget was, you know, tiny. But with a brief like that we were able to get people to donate to repurpose furniture that, for example, may have been used in fairs or in showrooms or whatever, you know, Vitara or tema de Alessi all sorts of people joined in on this project, you know, also share it and Coakley Lucy, I mean, you know, who wouldn't want to brief like that? And, you know, in the end, that was what we were able to do. And, you know, the building was already had great bones. There was, you know, it was the art of the possible, but what was so fantastic about it, was that a place that had been in and out, you know, basically people had come and got food, it was transactional, it was decent, it was incredibly valuable in its format, iteration, but now it's a place where people hang out, or at least now, but shortly again, I hope together now, you know, obviously, they won't be able to be in quite such close proximity. But I think what's great about it is that it is a hub, it's a center, it's a home for people who, you know, are generally speaking home less, I mean, they stay in hostels, but this is where they hang out during the day.Those values, though, for me, are a constant across all our projects. I mean, you know, this, as I said, was, you know, low budget, high priority in my opinion. And they've done several others food facade, I've done several others on based on that principle, that shared model. That's also what's great about it is it's not about owning it, it's about a model that works. Completely different, completely different sector, completely different. Application Is that him, which is probably the hospitality project that we are best known for. It's in Stockholm, it's a small hotel. It was a Student Information Center. Sometimes when people go there, they think that it's been like that forever, you know, how lucky we were to find such a lovely building to furnish? No, it wasn't, you know, a lot of what we do is actually going right back to the origins of a building to understand the layout. But not only that, just how it was lived in, what made it tick. What was its character? I think, understanding the nature of a building allows you then to build on it. So for example, here, we really wanted to make something that in some way challenged the whole idea of what a hotel was, you know, we like Jane Jacobs, the late great Jane Jacobs, observation that new ideas need old buildings, and old ideas sometimes need new buildings. And this is definitely a case of the former. Because of the tight footprint, it's, you know, didn't allow you on the ground floor to have the usual sort of back in front of house there isn't one. So you are thrown right into the middle of the workings of the machine. The staff in many ways are your hosts and you are in their world. And that's the joy of it. It also creates this great relationship. I think between the people that work there, the professionals that run it day to day and the people who visit it's a completely different connection to the usual sort of, if you'd like more survival take on service and the staff there really own it. You know, if you feel like it Their project, which was always a part of the idea. This is how it is now. And you know, although it's compact, it's flexible, it's adaptable. It has identity in the sense that it is building on the arts and crafts idea of the building, which was built in 1913. And in many ways, we've translated that sort of idea of, you know, domesticity as a model for Hospitality today and updated model technology is there, it's embedded, you have the, you know, the best technological support is just not visible, but it's embedded. And it's been there now for, you know, nearly 10 years and has now grown into the building next door. So I think it's sort of brand expression, I think through its physicality, is allowing it to grow organically. And then, lastly, something really lovely. One might say, you might say, okay, that's fine. If you're dealing with small projects, you know, and you have reasonable budgets. But what about, you know, can you scale it up, and I would argue that you can. This is one of the Cathay Pacific lounges in Hong Kong that we addressed. We worked with Cathay Pacific, and developed a global model, I would say, for that lounges. I mean, they've now built 10. And they needed to be able to deal with up to 2000 people a day. So we're not talking about little Buju corners of an airport, you know, they're almost public space. I mean, they're heavily trafficked.It'll be interesting to see what happens now. But certainly, at the point where they were built, you know, 1000s of people going through every day, I mean, it's a hub of the International traveler. And, I think, moving on from if you like, the idea of the very old fashioned idea, I think of luxury, to being something that really was genuinely hospitable to the people that were using it that addressed their well being I mean, you know, we had stacks of data. But in the end, I think the most useful thing was actually just to sit in the lounges and talk to people you know, to listen to watch, to ask questions and understand how they were feeling and when they look knackered you know, understanding what that meant in the context of their lives in terms of how that could then be reimagined in terms of a place that could support their daily Working Lives was really interesting, and how you could bring well being into that. We looked at how to create warmer, more comfortable environments, but in the end, it was about layering of details so that they were properly supportive. So from lighting to being able to use technology in charge easily without crawling on the floor mean, blindingly obvious, but not, I think, often done in practice. The material qualities so using wood because you otherwise bashed your suitcases into paint, which is never maintained enough, because airport lounges don't close for very many hours. Very durable floor. Actually, we chose a retail floor. It's not a very fancy floor, but it's super durable dimensions of chairs so that you actually sit left, you sit horizontally so to speak, not vertically, so you're not front to back your side to side because actually today with laptops with iPads, people tend to sit diagonally. A whole layering of data. One of the very interesting things that we discovered, for example, was the amount of food waste that typically goes with these spaces. So we looked again, through the numbers, we talked to people and realized it was actually cheaper to train some of the people who are behind the wall making food for the brother overloaded buffets that were then you know, such terrible culprits. of waste, not to mention the heat lamp factor. And we also understood from talking to people that what they really wanted was healthy fresh food, I mean, ideally soups, because you know, you obviously need more liquid before getting on a plane and managed to persuade Cathay Pacific to make the sort of noodle soup bar, the focus of their lounge, and they were very nervous about it at first, because for them, it wasn't made a luxury thing. They knew that people loved it, but you know, written down, it didn't sound any great shakes. But we said that, you know, that was our challenge as designers was to make it great, you know, to make it into that thing, to materialize that idea. And it's, it's worked incredibly well. I mean, people have, you know, very nice friendships with the people working there, the people going in every day, they know each other by name, you know, it's a completely different experience. And I mean, you know, food waste is slim to none, nobody goes and ask for 10, noodle soups, and much healthier. Last but not least, sleep. I mean, one of the first things in our brief from the board was, you know, no sofas, because sick people sleep on them. And you know, it's kind of true at the beginning of an airport lounge, or indeed, in an airport. You know, people tend to be lying across the sofas with their bags all around them. And it's, it's not the greatest Look, it's true, but you know, come on, they're knackered No, be human, for heaven's sake, you know, figure it out. So.after much discussion, we were able to agree that a space at the very end of the land could actually be turned into a really large sort of nap room, which again, is, you know, super popular, but it's like, come on. And it's also not just with customers. I mean, imagine if you work there endlessly having to drag grumpy passengers off the sofas, I mean, you know, that's also a hideous gig. So it's really trying to think how to make through, sometimes very normal common sensical steps, daily human experience into a better thing. And I think that that process, that approach is independent of budget and independent of sector, it's an approach, although sometimes it's true, you have to fight quite hard for it. Normally, our main focus is interiors, but just one product to show is a project we did with nanny malkina. And again, I mean, that we didn't think about what's it going to look like? Actually, what we wanted to do was, look right back at the root of, in this case, textiles, and what would make the least possible impact on the environment and be the best for the people making it? What what could we do as designers that the route would change the experience in terms of the makers, but also in terms of the impact on on the planet. And the producers said that it will be no bleach, no dye, locally sourced in the sense of near as possible access to materials, and hand spun, because that actually provided jobs in their locality. And it was just really interesting when we use chubby wool from Afghanistan, which is woven just over the border in Pakistan, nettle, jute, I mean, you know, all organic materials, all made locally, as local as possible, because obviously, the producer is not always in the same place where the material comes, but you know, as close as possible. But of course, if you take that approach, you have to let go of the idea that you send over a design and just get it made as if invisibly by you know, a machine. It's really a participation, it's a collaboration with the makers. And the outcome was really interesting. I mean, we had a two way exchange of, you know, seeing what they could make with those criteria and very strictly controlled criteria. But what could be changed in terms of detail to just make it feel special, but what's particularly interesting about this project, because it was with Dan nanimarquina, who's super well established, trustworthy, responsible, wonderful woman and company, is that it's actually available for contract. You know, it's not the cheapest but nor is it you know, it's not so sort of bubble. It's actually a realistically priced product for the contract market. And it proves that can be done if you think about it systemically rather than always in terms of a product Are we talking about the roadkill? So is that the whole thing? Everything? I mean, not the chair and the textile. So the rugs, the cushion all the textiles. So there's a cotton hammock. This is the chaubey wool rug you're looking at here. There's nettle and jute. There's a Yeah, there's seven products basically within the route range. But I think what was interesting about that collection was that it was really a system more than it was focused on, you know, make it like this the system. You know, given those strict criteria, then became a different way of working where we could produce something really beautiful, but we had to let go of that initial control, the control was in the criteria and not in imposing us specific design. That's it.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Okay, cool. Can you unshare your screen, please? Yeah. So did you start the airport lounge, noodle bar trend? And Elsa?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Um, maybe, but I'm not. Not by thinking it's an airport lounge knew about trying, we basically came to it by talking to people who said that, you know, they wanted to arrive, ideally, feeling slightly healthier, you know, when they got there when they left or at least not wretched. And, you know, also the very obvious thing that you can, you know, create lovely spaces, but a smell of sort of old baked beans under a heat lamp, that sounds nuts, you know, also not helpful. And the food waste thing, which was just shocking, really shocking, not to mention the fact that I understood that there were so many people working behind the wall producing this food that everybody threw away. I mean, it was just a bizarre setup. But you know, it's a legacy from the 20th century when more was, you know, what everybody thought they want it. But I think, you know, to the point that you were making earlier with Peter, I think, you know, it isn't anymore. I think we're looking at quality, we're looking at ethics, we're looking at how things are made and where they go. And I think, as designers, we have to square the circle. Not on our own, we're working with people, but we have to stand for that. We have agency.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;I wish British Airways would give you a call because I'm sure you've been in their lounges at Heathrow where you go there at 10 to nine, and there's piles of croissants and bacon and breakfast, he stuff. And then at certain points, staff turnout with trolleys with the lunch staff. For breakfast.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Yeah, the airport lounge is a weird thing. And, you know, I must say initially, when we were asked to look at it, I thought, what, you know, who would ever want to go to an airport land? But then I thought actually, that is quite a good challenge. Why would you want to go? And then I understood actually, that for a lot of people who have to travel a lot, a lot for work. They actually are, you know, they're kind of CO working spaces. Really, you know?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;When did you do the first Cathay Pacific lounge?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Dolly? I think it was maybe four or five years ago. And, you know, the rest since then.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;So you weren't associated with the kind of notion of well being an interior is, can you tell us a little bit about that? What does that? What does that mean? And how do you achieve that?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Well, um, I look at it, as, you know, the idea of well being being something that is intrinsically interconnected with our neighbors. I mean, I think that it's about you can't be well, on your own, let's face it, you know, we are social animals, we are connected to each other, we're connected to a bigger picture, you know, we are the system ultimately. And I think that true well being is something that is about how we can join the dots in that respect. So yes, it's it's looking at it from a point of view of the individual but yes, taking that through, obviously, issues like health, community, sustainability, even economics. I mean, you know, it's all connected. I think the fact that it's all been looked at in silos, this is, you know, relatively recent phenomenon and doesn't make sense.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;When we're talking about design in times of change, obviously, we're in a time of incredible change at the moment. We don't really know what the world's gonna look like, after this or even if there is going to be an after this. I mean, maybe.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;I mean, will it just can Can you hurt? You know, I mean, it's, you know, everybody talks about the vaccine. But you know, there isn't a vaccine for HIV. I mean, you know, I think, hopefully, but let's not make that assumption.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;But as a as a designer, is there anything that you can, you can foresee that would be needed in in interiors or InDesign to help us get out of this? Or when we return to some kind of semblance of normality? How will the pandemic change? interior space, for example? in some.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;manner, there's been a lot of discussion around that. And I think that, you know, there's also a lot more research that's got to come through, because it's changing in front of our eyes really, even as we see, even at you know, week by week. I mean, I noticed a couple of weeks ago, the Center for controlling diseases that CDC issued something that basically said that, actually, surfaces are not much of a problem, you know, I mean, it's not that you want to go around licking the tables, but that the virus is extremely unlikely to be transferred through surfaces unless you touch them, and you're very unlucky to touch something that's had a massive viral overload. And then you sort of rub your eyes, you know, I mean, wash your hands do not touch your face would seem to be the more important part of that. I mean, having said that, obviously, we need to be more conscious of cleanliness. But if you look at the facts, as I understand them, ventilation is a much more important issue that, in fact, airborne molecules from talking, in close proximity, hover in the air for sort of 18 minutes. I mean, that is really problematic. So I think, thinking about ventilation, thinking about physical distancing, I think is probably if you look at the hierarchy in terms of interior design, super important, as composed, prepared to rushing around turning everything into sort of wipe down plastic. Having said that, what I think is interesting is the practices of cleanliness, are really important. And I think we are going to be very, very demanding of, you know, the optics of places that are kept clean and trusting the traceability of the establishments we use.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;This was also the kind of the performance or ritualistic side of hygiene, I mean, a lot of design of interior design, spars, hospitality over the last decade or so has been so focused on the ambiance of a space, water sense sound. But I came into our office building on Monday for the first time in two months to be confronted with a, like a five liter plastic pump. Absolutely no, the cleanliness, squirt alcohol on your hand is such a velocity that splashes all over you. It's like, that's okay, that's hygienic, but it's not much of a not much of an experience. No.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;And I think absolutely, we have to figure out what the really important things are, and then integrate them into buildings going forward. I mean, you know, just quite pragmatic things like, you know, in hotel rooms, I think, you know, we absolutely have to have a place where you can have either your hand sanitizer or ideally a sink as you go in place where you can take your shoes off before you enter the bedroom, etc. I mean, it's really thinking about the physical space quite differently. But actually, funnily enough, it's almost going back a century, isn't it? Because when you look at, you know, the way that cities change to the late 19th century, early 20th century in reaction to you know, cholera, typhoid, influenza, it's, you know, you can see big similarities. I mean, the so called Bermondsey revolution, radically reduced child mortality, for example, from cholera. And, you know, also numbers of women dying in childbirth through a whole series of social actions, but also sort of health actions. I mean, in a matter of a few years, it feels like that kind of social rupture is something we're confronting now. So it's, you know, I think it's, it's gonna be a big I think, social change, big mindset change and I think we will see it in design. quite radical ways.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Again, to go back to my experience of coming back to the design office, I'm not sure. Have you been to our office in Hoxton there was no. I mean, I used to think it was quite a cool office. It's you know, Pinilla or step designed it, it looks great. But what I've realized is it's so unhealthy because we have these we have these whole wall of glass overlooking the canal is north facing. So you end to have the sun blasting in which looks very, very pretty. But of course, the problem with that that kind of concrete, glass wall space is you have to have air handling on all the time to keep it cool. No, no, obviously, but you can't open the windows more than.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;No, and natural ventilation is, you know, one of the most significant things. I mean, funnily enough, I work and live in a, you know, late 19th century building, which was formerly a tannery. And of course, they had to have cross ventilation. So actually, my building is probably healthier than yours.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Yeah, so I'm beginning I'm sitting here on my own thinking, if we want to bring people back to the office, which at the moment, we're not going to, and nobody wants to come back. Here, we would have to have a word with the landlord about making the windows more openable. Because we don't want to put the air conditioning on Yeah, no, fans blowing the same air around that's causing the same problem. But you know, the other thing I was thinking is there's been a, because everyone's at home at the moment in London. So burglaries are down. But instead, people are stealing bicycles like crazy. Absolutely, yeah, no, I gather, we were trying to get a deal on a bicycle, or to have a bike park in the back. Because we always used to ban people from bringing their bikes into the office, because they just they do take up so much space, and they sort of, they look like something from the street rather than something from the workplace. But we might, might have to reconfigure things. So we allow people to bring their bikes in.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;But it is interesting. And I mean, even things like thinking about how, when you're organizing seating, people should sit back to back rather than front to front, although obviously, you know, there's limits to that. But you know, your whole way of looking at how you would organize clusters of people in the space is going to be completely different. I think it's, it's gonna require a whole different approach. But having said that, I mean, as you say, I mean, right now, not many people want to come back to work, but even in the categories where supposedly people will still come back and work together. Apparently, estimates are now running at about 20%. So, you know, that's a very different workplace. You know, basically, we've been fast tracked into the future, you know, it was probably going to happen anyway. But now it's happened. For real, and we've got to figure it out quickly.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Because your home is also your workspace, isn't it your offices in in the same? Yeah, I mean, I live about the shop. Yeah. And what's happening with your team, then they are going to continue working from home? Or have you figured out how you're going to do that yet?
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;We're in the process of doing it. I think, you know, not everybody can work from home. That's the reality. I mean, it's very nice. Obviously, you know, we've had a lot of discussions around that, you know, for some working from home is great. But for others, if they're in small, shared flats, you know, they've got bad internet. If they don't necessarily even like their flatmates, you know, there are many, many reasons why people might actually want to go to work. But the interesting thing is, and I've heard this from people who are sort of in the office business, they say that actually, people don't want to come back, funnily enough to work, or at least not in the sense of concentration and productivity. They want to come back to be with other people.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Unknown Speaker;And I'm sorry, somebody, which is very weird. I'm here in the building all on my own, but.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;it's so quiet, you hear different noises that you don't don't normally hear. Another thing I was thinking of that because because we're being constantly told that outside is is safer that you can be what when you showed your picture of that interior in your first project, I think everyone's now programmed to look at lots of people together and think why aren't they social distancing that completely? Exactly. Even movies from years ago? You say, I can't believe that they're actually touching in the street. But maybe there's a potential for a new hybrid indoor outdoor kind of space, because of course, yeah, you can do a meeting outside if it was raining, but it wouldn't be too complicated to think of a way of putting some kind of owning over it. So that was good through ventilation. So we could potentially see that a rise of a sort of hybrid, indoor outdoor space. Maybe.
Dezeentranscripts;ilse_crawford_virtual_design_festival;Ilse Crawford;Yeah, and I think also, you know, hours, I think, you know, people will be able to probably go into work. I mean, I don't know, not 24 seven, but you know, choose their hours, you know, other ways to be able to create more space. But absolutely, I think we're gonna have to be extremely creative and how we can basically allow the possibility of distance in what is, you know, normally speaking quite a squashed up city.
