dataset;session;speaker;utterance
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Hello, hi, yo. So welcome to the third part of our collaboration with Lensvelt today as part of virtual design festival. You - Where are you speaking to us from?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Ehm I'm talking from my studio. This is like the boardroom of my studio. So normally I'm downstairs working, creating stuff. And but today, I'm here.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;I'And you're in Rotterdam, right? Yeah, Rotterdam. Yes. Yeah. Tell us a little bit about yourself. Who are you? And what do you do?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Well, I went to art school, in the beginning of the 80s. And actually, when I was in art school at the sculpture department, I started to make functional objects like machines, furniture, all kinds of stuff. And so to me, I was right from the beginning on I was like, transgressing the traditional borders of art. And I've been doing that since. And so I will not call myself a designer, or some that I'm an artist, but I also do architecture, I do design and, and I bought all the products I did with Hans, for example, they are all spring off of an art installation, that happened to be a good piece of furniture. And that's how we started.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And we've met a few times, and we've done talks together. And what's extraordinary about your work is, as you said, you have these you have these art projects, but each each art project is kind of like a world in itself. Give us an example of the kind of worlds that you create.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Well, an interesting one is called the new tribal lebrons, in which I was going - I - we invented the Industrial Revolution. So go back to the origin of our culture, of our wealth, and also the origin of let's say, industrial design and design as we know it now. So I started making a sawmill. So you can get trees into planks and beams to build houses and other kinds of buildings. One of the important ones is a blast furnace. So that's the kind of installation factory where you can make steel out of coal and iron ore. So I wanted to go back to the that origin to create to fabricate our own steel. And by that sense, also go back to very basic materials and, and products. So and then, of course, you had the people living in the blast furnace, you had new organisation of tribes, you had new rituals, new religion. So basically, I created the whole new parallel worlds of people that, you know, are very romantic, and want to become one with the industry of becoming one with the machine, instead of people going back to nature. That's it.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And you create these worlds. And then from those worlds, you design furniture that can be used in those worlds. And then it goes into production. Lensvelt, for example. So Hans, tell us about your relationship with Joep, how long have you known each other? And how did you start to work together?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;So in the late 90s, in the media, we're looking at publications about the good, the bad, and the ugly. That was an insulation made by your party, Walker Art in Institute in Cincinnati. And, you know, this was a period of minimalism of multiple Savers, john Paulson, Jasper Morrison, Pat Alonzo, and so on. And the interior of this black house, what was a part of the installation was really fascinating me. And it was also minimalistic, but it was another form of minimalism. And so I decided to call the ugly and to make an appointment with Joep. And the question was you can we make a... Can we make something...  can we make a chair and a table of the concept what is inside the black house? And so actually, it all started.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And what was the products that came out of that conversation?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;It is the shaker share, and I selected some slides. And it is one of those slides.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Okay, why don't you show us the image is nothing.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Okay. Okay, let me go here. Okay, let me see. Yes, it should be this right. Yeah. And then we should. Okay, so this is the, this is just what tell something about the friendship between Joep and myself. Recently, in February, we did a lecture. In Amsterdam, we are commissioned to do an enormous job in Berlin, it's a project of OMA. And, you know, oh may use a lot of projects, designed also by Joep, this broad project what we are producing. So we decided to do a lecture in Breda, where OMA talked about this project, Joep about his life, his motivation as an artist, and that was this, this was at the end of the, of this of this master class is how we call it. This, this is this insulation, which I just mentioned, and the black house, you do see in the back, and the inside look like this, and I felt instant in love. I said, yup, we have to make some furniture of it. And maybe you, maybe you can tell how long it took to get this all made. I thought actually that this was the concept from the first day, but later I understood that it was slightly different. Joep.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Joep I think, I think Hans wants you to say something about this.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Okay, so this piece is called the good, the bad and the ugly. And there was a commission by the Walker Art Institute in Minneapolis. And so they wanted to have this mobile arts lab, so they could bring the programme the culture, to, to the poor neighbourhoods, to the schools, to know to include them, which was very nice. And on the same time, I thought, well, this is - Give me the commission. And I like it. But I also said like, well, this is an art institute. And this sounds a lot with like design. So I almost cancelled the commission. And I said, Well, I will do it. I will make this mobile arts lab, which was this kind of big trailer. But I want to build this black house this house, which I was in, you know, I was kind of it was at the time that the unabomber was like the most looked for what? criminal. So and I imagined, you know, this would be the house of the unabomber. And I liked this kind of unabomber because he was very recycling materials. He had interesting ideas about industry and technology. And so to me, this guy, the unabomber, represented the good, the bad and the ugly. So I said to them, okay, I will build it. But MIT is black house. So inside this house, you have a kitchen and a stove. But you also have like a laboratory to make bombs. And, and also an attic with a very scary cages and kind of Silence of the Lambs atmosphere. So basically, so I was really interested in seeing both sides of what was happening, the good, the bad, and the ugly. So we worked for months on it. And then the day before the opening, I said shit, we don't have a chair for the unabomber to sit on. So with this piece of scrap wood that we had, we created this chair that you see on the somewhere in the middle. And so this was the shaker chair. Which of course was inspired by the shaker chest, which are made by the shakers. So to me, this was not really a design this was like a last minute decision made to scrap wood and it just turns out to be perfect. And I think I like this way of designing I don't like design that takes like months of perfection to make it perfect because that means it was never perfect in the in in the beginning.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;So very nice. Of course to see this furniture then later used on procedures projects, like for instance the museum, boy mountain burning in Rotterdam. The inside was designed by you bolso or in this installation. This was an installation. This was the first installation organised by the Museum of Boijmans van Beuningen in September 2010. And the first installation was organised by Joep. And really cool to see all those chairs there. That was not the only thing we developed for this project. We also developed this glider sofa, which this the back can glide. So you don't have this problem of left and right with product furniture, that's always an issue. So hem beautiful this. This is the next thing I would like to talk about. In 2001. Joep was commissioned the pavilion for the Dutch insurance company called Interpolis. And Joep Joep made this drawing as a presentation after that. They said, Okay, that's what we want. And after that, you start looking for this chair. But this chair was not available in the market. They all were over designed, and they did not look good. So you approached me and he said, Hans, please can you help me? Can you will produce that the chair for me. And that's what I did. This is the chair. And very funny is that the second person who came up is on the left hand side Jeu van Sint Fiet. He is in art collector. He is a doctor in Maastricht. He is crazy of art. He is a collector his father was a butcher, he was a collector as well. And this Jeu van Sint Fiet he said Joep Can you develop for me a piece of art what relax my patients. And then Joep came up with the with the chair on the right hand side, the torture chair to relax his patients. And but that's not the end of the story. The end of the story is that in 2012, in Amsterdam, we organised the Nuclear Security Summit. And in this period, Barack Obama was three days in Amsterdam. Nope, sorry, the Hague, and he was seating as all other world leaders on this AVL chair. what actually is an ancestor of torture chair. Isn't that a thing?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Yeah, no, the the way how I looked at this chair, I mean, I wanted to have a chair, which was like how I would make a chair. So if I would make a chair in my workshop, I would just take some square steel tubing and welding machine and the kind of rollers that you just buy in the shop. So to me, it was really like, you know, well, let's make a chair with the stuff that I have. So that's the that's why the chair looks so simple. And so industrial. And so you could say non design or kind of design doesn't really play a role in it. That's why I think I really like this chair. And I think that's why the chair is also special and successful.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Okay, so this was our presentation in 2012. Joep, and the idea was to do this enormous piece of art, the Canon and the pieces in blue in the same colour, a certain kind of efe clients blue, that our products, what we our products. And on the right hand side, you do see the pieces of artwork we showed as well. And especially for this installations, in only a few weeks, we be produced three new products. That was the cloud table that was the Coker chair, and that was the spider chair, the Coker chair, you do see on the left hand side and the spiders chair on the right hand side. And I'm very curious myself what the next picture will be. Here again, another picture for the installation. And this is what you used taught Joep you in your opinion, a share should be white in one day. So in this period, you were producing something like 50 chairs. And finally when they all were there, we selected two of those chairs which We showed in Milan in 2012, right?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And when I first met you hands I remember Fabio Novembre took me to this show. Yeah, use me to what? What is Where did you get the gun from? How'd you find a gun like that?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;You have to watch that, that that you have to Joep because he created it.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Guilty. So yeah, it's one of my artworks. So I was preparing for a revolution or third world war. And so I designed the three super large cannons, the WW one, which was the interpretation of a very, very large Austrian check cannon, like one of the very big ones, but what's also very beautiful because at that time, people still were thinking and very round shapes, everything was being cast, it's from cast iron. So this was like a kind of an in depth cannon, you could see the love for design. Then I made a ww two, which is a Russian cannon, which was produced by the hundreds of 1000s. So their design wasn't an option. It was just like, you know, how can we make as many cannons as possible like the same kind of aesthetics as an ak 47 machine gun, and then the WW three, the blue gun is actually a contemporary gun, American gun, which really uses the very modernistic design, very simple, very clean lines. And so and that, of course was like the cannon folder who the world war three which is going to happen soon, maybe or maybe not. But the blue gun is that and that's why because the blue was the gun was blue. Hans and me decide, okay, let's make everything blue. And prepare for the show, which is called benefication. Which I think it was one of the fabulous show in Milan.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Yeah, so this the chair, and then it's so nice to see this chair all in a nice project. OMA is using this chair very frequently. For also for also, for instance, also in the timmerhuis, that's a part of the town hall of Rotterdam. And here it's used in the offices of MPR de vida headquarters in Rotterdam. It's nice that this kind of architecture firms love this product. Love all the products designed by Joep. And then I even think that this is already the last Yes, this is already the last slide.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Great. Thanks very much Hans, if you could unshare your screen. Okay, let's do so. Top here. Okay, yeah. So, you were talking about World War Three, that a lot of your, a lot of your concepts do have the sort of dystopian feeling to them? Is that is that because you fear the worst of the world? Or is it just a kind of a provocation?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;You could say, provocation, I would say it's, I see it as a catalyst to, to make people talk to discuss to think about our world and our life. So it's not really a provocation. It's like, I like to challenge them and I but tickle them a little bit, by by doing that, and and I think I mean, this is one of the main reasons of artists to communicate ideas to touch people to give them an emotion of beauty or orderliness.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And tell us about you had your own country for a while you had your own states in Rotterdam. So you actually Yes, you live you live the dream of setting up some kind of radical colony. Tell us about that and what happened with it.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;So in the 90s, I was making a lot of mobile homes and farms, energy plants and all kinds of like really functional stuff in order to be independent. And then in 2001, I thought like wow, actually, I have everything. I have the hospital, workshop for weapons and bombs. I have alpo factory, I have a power plant water purification, I have a mobile home. So why not let's start our own state our free state. And so we took a piece of land in the harbour of Rotterdam. And we built our farm. People start building houses on the lands, we made our own flag, we printed our money. We built like a restaurant and houses everything without building permits or liquor licence, there was really kind of anarchist time. And at that time I thought in Netherlands was a county where we now there's a big grey zone of stuff, which is not allowed, but they allow you because for whatever reason, because they're too busy with other things. So I fought them in this is going to be a very, very big success. And it was a big success. But after some months, we really got the whole city turned against us and and so after nine months, 11 months or something, we we stopped the Free State. But it was interesting idea to to really say like, you know what it was like a kind of a maybe, remark on over organisation and over design that is happening in our community.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And as an artist who has these kind of very provocative ideas, and you talk about wanting freedom and the freedom of expression and freedom to live your life, it seems a little bit strange that you would then make a chair, an office chair, out of those kind of projects. Do you feel like the chair is somehow a bit of a disappointment to you? Or do you was that an even bigger provocation that out of an idea on some kind of dystopian future, you get an office chair.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;The direct result of the Free State was the bio gas insulation, so I designed the bio gas insulation for the future of the free state that I imagined had 1000 inhabitants. But by the time the design was ready, a free state was closed. So I said okay, but I'm so in love with this bio gas installation, I'm going to make it anyway. And although we don't have 1000 civilians to, to hook to to provide the excrement for the biogas installation, I just take 1000 slaves and put as a hose and as I give them force feeding, I give them alcohol. So the only thing they do is to produce excrements in order to create biogas in order to create energy to create the food and alcohol. So I started making an extreme complicated art installation, in which the human was reduced to a small cog wheel. And so but then, I was almost bankrupt. And then, we, we always get like design and architecture and then this stuff. Other furniture came out of it. And to me, I think this this art and design this this, this, this difference, you could say comes very normal to me. It's very simple. Logic at interweaves. I don't have a disadvantage for art or design. It just goes all together. So it's not strange to us.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;There's no conflict between the arts and the design then.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Unknown Speaker;No, it's a hate and love. But sometimes I'm in love with the one and the other. Sometimes you're around so.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;and in the conversation with Martin busters. Now we were talking about the future of these big design fairs like Milan, but what about the art world? How do you view the future of art fairs and the way that art is presented and sold? After Coronavirus, obviously.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Yeah, I mean, of course I participate in the art fairs and have collectors museum buying the artworks but actually, I'm very much interested in to make this very large instance installations like a new tribal lab around AVL Ville the first state are the projects I'm working on now. So and these are not, they are really things like art installations, but they're not really part of this systems. So I accept them and large, empty industrial buildings or my own studio and exhibition spaces. So I'm really thinking like art. I want to keep it very much close to me I say. If you want to see he just come here and then you, you you look at it. So I think in the art world is going to change as well. And to me, what I would like to do is to become independent, financially, and emotionally to just create those kinds of things, artworks, designs and celebrations that I want to do. So I will buy some lottery tickets.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;and Hans, how, how different? Is it working with an artist like you with with other designers? Does he come to you with nice technical drawings? Or does he come?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;no, I've never, I've never seen it. Sometimes I visit the studio when I do it now then I do see an interesting object like the lazy modernist. It's this is Chinese Lazy Boy stripped and rebuilt. And I saw that and I thought, Okay, this is the workstation or the future, you know, and I asked you if we could make a product out of that. And, you know, we did not have a sofa and the sofas I just showed, I went to Joep, I said, you can we can we make a sofa. And then I received something like 30 sketches, and we selected one. And then we just started to build that so far out of foam, and then we checked the measurements, then then we took those elements out foam, and we made we made a chair out of that. A sofa out of that. So it's it's, of course, I cannot tell you up, I need this, I need this. And this kind of recommendations. And this kind of requirements. No, it's a lot of fun to develop something with Joep. Very, very practical.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And Hans, which is the most successful product of all of the things that you make.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Made by Joep you mean?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;or you or any of you, any of your designs?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;That was because that's quite an expensive chair, the chair we make of hL 30 is the most full chair, but it's a rather cheap chair. But the chair of Joep I will also share. Years, years was the cork on which this company was floating. That's what we say. In the Netherlands, of course, we had to face many crisises. And we had various periods that it was hard to sell. But then there always was done over who came through the AVL office chair. So I can say that you police out safe my company several times.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Joep van Lieshout;Yeah, the other way round, by the way.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Thank you. Thank you for your friendship, you know that CBO says, yeah.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Obama when Obama was photographed in your chair, did that have a good marketing impact for you?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Yes, yes. But this actually also very funny, you know that a chair for an insurance company becomes a torture. And finally, the most powerful man in the world ends up on such a torture. Yeah. And of course, we try to use it in our sales. And yes, it's also something like a quality. Mark, you know that this is a good chair. Yes.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;And do you have any more projects coming out with you?
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Hans Lensvelt;Yes, definitely. Definitely. Definitely. I'm just I'm so in this interview that I'm now not able to list them with, there are always a few projects in the pipeline. And sometimes, I don't know if I already asked Joep. I also want so my new product with Joep and it should be outdoor furniture at the moment. The waste, plastic is not used anymore. There are fields fields, with containers, completely packed with waste. Plastic, because the industry has fallen down has collapsed and nobody is using this waste material anymore. So how great would it be when Joep and I could develop a product together to get get rid of this waste? So that's something new in my head, but I'm not sure if I already discussed this with you. And then of course I want a chair but it will be something totally different. But like it's something interesting.
Dezeentranscripts;joep_van_lieshout_virtual_design_festival;Interviewer;Well it sounds like you just started the discussion. Joep, It's great to see you again. I think you can you have a new project less less plastic. Hans See you in half an hour with our last conversation with Fabio novembre. Looking forward, looking forward, see you later bye Okay, bye.
